Added metrics cardinality handling for Google Cloud Spanner receiver - part 1. (#5981)
open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector-contrib: receiver/googlecloudspannerreceiver/cardinality.md

# Cloud Spanner: Controlling Metrics Cardinality for Open Telemetry Receiver

## Overview
This document describes the algorithm used to control the cardinality of the Top N metrics exported by Cloud Spanner receiver in OpenTelemetry collector.
With cardinality limits enforced in Cloud Monitoring and possibly in Prometheus, it is critical to control the cardinality of the metrics to avoid drops in time series which can limit the usability of Cloud Spanner custom metrics.

## Background
Cloud Monitoring has 200,000 active time series (streams) [limits](https://cloud.google.com/monitoring/quotas) for custom metrics per project.
Active time series translates to streams that are sent in the last 24 hours.
This means that the number of streams that can be sent by OpenTelemetry collector should be controlled to this limit as the metrics will be dropped by Cloud Monitoring.

## Calculation
For simplicity purpose and for explaining of calculation, which is currently done in implementation, lets assume that we have 1 project, 1 instance and 1 database.

> Such calculations are done when collector starts. If cardinality total limit is different(for calculations below we assume it is 200000) - numbers will be different.

Author: Done.

> According to the metrics metadata configuration(at the moment of writing this document) we have:

Author: Sounds reasonable.

> According to the metrics metadata configuration(at the moment of writing this document) we have:

Author: Done.

> - 30 low cardinality metrics(amount of total N + active queries summary metrics);

Reviewer: Metrics isn't my strongest side, care to explain in the readme the difference between Top N vs. Total N?

Author: You can find this info in receiver's **README.md**. First paragraph - there is dedicated link to Spanner Sys tables description there.

- 26 high cardinality metrics(amount of top N metrics).

> For low cardinality metrics allowed amount of time series is **projects x instances x databases** and in our case is **1 x 1 x 1 = 1**.

Author: Done.

> Then, remaining quota of allowed time series in 24 hours is **200000 - 30 = 199970**.

Author: Done.

> In 24 hours we can have max **24 x 60 = 1440** time series values.

Author: Done.

So, for high cardinality metrics we have **199970 / 26 = 7691** allowed time series per metric.

This means each metric converted from these columns should not have a cardinality of 7691 per day.

> Taking into account 1440 minutes we'll obtain **7691 / 1440 = 5** new time series per minute.

Author: It should be 1440 time series, sorry. This value is our limit by timestamp (per minute). In case this is reached we are not exporting new time series, only those which are in cash. This is the intent of algorithm.

While fingerprint and truncated field are part of some Top N table, it does not add to cardinality as there is 1 to 1 correspondence with Query/Txn/Read to their fingerprint and truncated information.

Cardinality is the number of unique sets of labels that are sent to Cloud Monitoring to create a new time series over a 24-hour period.

## Detailed Design
To avoid confusion between labels and queries/txn shapes/read shapes and row key, queries will be loosely used in the below design to make it easier for understanding the design.

Also, the **7691** time series limit is used as an example.
This needs to be made configurable based on the number of databases, number of metrics per table and future growth of the metrics per table.

With **7691** time series limit and each metric is sent once per minute, there are **60 minute x 24 hours  = 1440** time series data will be sent to Cloud Monitoring.

To allow new queries (new Top queries which are not seen in the last 24 hours) to be sent to Cloud Monitoring, each minute should have an opportunity to send new queries.

> Assuming uniform distribution of new queries being created in Top N tables, the algorithm should handle **round_down(7691/1440) = 5** new queries per minute.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Assuming a uniform distribution of new queries being created in Top N tables, the algorithm should handle **floor(7691/1440) = 5** new queries per minute.
```

Author: Done

These 5 new queries should be the Top 5 queries which were not exported in the last 24 hours.

While the existing time series (queries which have been exported in the last 24 hours) should be good to export, exporting more than 100(**top_metrics_query_max_rows** receiver config parameter) queries per minute may be an overkill.
Customers can tune the maximum number of queries per minute per metric to a smaller value if required.

> An LRU cache with TTL of 24 hours is maintained per each Top N metric.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
An LRU cache with TTL of 24 hours is maintained per each Top N metric.
```

What happens when I have multiple collector instances?

Author: Since LRU cache is in memory of collector instance - you'll have separate cache and limits per instance-metric. For now, that is an intent. Ability to use external caching for this is currently out of scope(at least not in current and upcoming related MRs).

Reviewer: This should be documented here, along with the unintended consequences of having multiple replicas that might have different caches.

Author: Do you want from me to do it now or can I do it in scope of part 2 MR?

Reviewer: You can do it later, just don't forget about it :-) I'd suggest creating a new issue out of this comment, and assigning the issue to you.

Author: Ok, lets avoid of creating issues and bureaucratic way. Since review is not over - I can do it today.

Author: Done.
